doc/website: add ent-hooks blogpost (#2398)
ent/ent: doc/website/blog/2022-03-14-ent-hooks-examples.md

---

> title: A few examples for Ent hooks  

Reviewer: would you click a post with this title? lets find something that isn't cringey click-baitey but still is attractive

Author: 👍

author: Yoni Davidson
authorURL: "https://github.com/yonidavidson"
authorImageURL: "https://avatars0.githubusercontent.com/u/5472778"
authorTwitter: yonidavidson
---
Hooks are a popular subject in our blog posts
[Building Observable Ent Applications with Prometheus](/blog/2021/08/12/building-observable-ent-application-with-prometheus)

> [Sync Changes to External Data Systems using Ent Hooks](/blog/2021/11/1/sync-to-external-data-systems-using-hooks)

Reviewer: this sentence doesn't compile.. hooks are a popular subject in our blog posts [link] [link] but their reactive nature makes them..? 

Maybe something like,

Despite being one of the most powerful features of Ent, Schema Hooks (link) are often overlooked by many users.  We've covered hooks in previous blog posts (such as x and y), but learning from my personal experience building real applications with Ent, I thought it would be beneficial to put them in the spotlight once more.

Author: 👍

> but their reactive nature makes them a tool that is usually affiliated with more advanced users.

Reviewer: "affiliation" isn't the a correct term here

Author: 👍

My goal in this blog post is to show you a few use cases where hooks can help you when building servers, and provide you with a few go-to recipes.
These examples can be later reviewed in this [repo](https://github.com/yonidavidson/ent-hooks-examples).

### So first, let us review in a few words what are hooks?

[Hooks](https://entgo.io/docs/hooks) are a feature of Ent that allows adding custom logic before and after operations that change the data entities.

A mutation is an operation that creates a change in the database.
There are 5 types of mutations:
1. Create.
2. UpdateOne.
3. Update.
4. DeleteOne.
5. Delete.

Hooks are functions that get and return an [ent.Mutator](https://pkg.go.dev/entgo.io/ent#Mutator).

> They function similar to the popular [HTTP middleware pattern](https://github.com/go-chi/chi#middleware-handlers).

Reviewer: chi is cool but it didn't invent middleware, better reference a more canonical reference such as Wikipedia or an academic paper or a book excerpt.

```go
package example

import (
	"context"

	"entgo.io/ent"
)

func exampleHook() ent.Hook {
	//use this to init your hook
	return func(next ent.Mutator) ent.Mutator {
		return ent.MutateFunc(func(ctx context.Context, m ent.Mutation) (ent.Value, error) {
			// Do something before mutation.
			v, err := next.Mutate(ctx, m)
			if err != nil {
				// Do something if error after mutation.
			}
			// Do something after mutation.
			return v, err
		})
	}
}
```

In Ent, there are two types of mutation hooks - schema hooks and runtime hooks. Schema hooks are mainly used for defining
custom mutation logic on a specific entity type, for example, syncing entity creation to another system. Runtime hooks, on the other hand, are used
to define more global logic for adding things like logging, metrics, tracing, etc.

In this post, I will focus mainly on schemas hooks.

> ### So why use them?

Reviewer: This section goes into the design principle we call "schema as code". Perhaps it should be the title

> In ent, we try and push the entity's logic down to the schema level, this allows us to define everything about an entity close to its definition. Entity properties could be:

Reviewer: Ent not ent

1. Valid values.
2. Types.
3. Allowed mutations.
4. Privacy.
5. Required Side effect (heavy compute for example).

---

> Oftentimes, it’s more comfortable to define these properties in the RPC level, a controller provides a context and all the mutations

Reviewer: Don't necessarily agree with this statement. It's definitely the common practice in the industry and Ent is different from other frameworks in its approach. 
Its huge benefit IMO isn't simplifying the management of code (reactive/event-based systems are harder to read and debug and reason about), but rather from the ability to compose higher-order systems such as generated backend implementations.

and validation are done before changing the value.
Yet, as the system grows and more developers are working on it simultaneously, making sure that these validations and calculations are done
whenever the entity is changing becomes much more challenging. This requires more pre-known knowledge about each entity and
can cause unintentional bugs or inconsistencies in the data that are only discovered in runtime.
Inspired by the experience of bigger companies like Facebook, Ent decided to handle this by keeping this information
as close as possible to the entity. Therefore hooks are just that - a piece of code that runs before and after an entity 
is changing and that defines additional behavior.

## Let's do some examples

> For our examples we use a simple schema of Users and Dogs.

Reviewer: line breaks here feels like a stanza in a poem

```go
func TestUserConnectionStringHook(t *testing.T) {
	ctx := context.Background()
	c := enttest.Open(t, dialect.SQLite,
		"file:TestSchemaConfHooks?mode=memory&cache=shared&_fk=1",
	)
	u := c.User.Create().SetName("Yoni").SetConnectionString("mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306)").SaveX(ctx)
	require.Equal(t, "mysql://root:****@localhost:3306)", u.ConnectionString)
	require.Equal(t, "pass", u.Password)
	require.Equal(t, "mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306)", u.FullConnectionString())
}
```

As you can see, inserting a connection string updates the string to have `****` instead of the password and stores the 
password in the ```Password``` field that is defined as [sensitive](https://entgo.io/docs/schema-fields#sensitive-fields).
To have the connection string in full valid form we created a utility function ```FullConnectionString()```.

#### Recipe:

First thing, add the hook to your schema:
```go
// Hooks of the User.
func (User) Hooks() []ent.Hook {
	return []ent.Hook{
		hook.If(clearConnectionString,
			hook.And(hook.Or(hook.HasOp(ent.OpUpdateOne), hook.HasOp(ent.OpCreate)), hook.HasFields(user.FieldConnectionString)),
		),
	}
}
```

> * Do not forget to run go generate or the hook will not be registered.

Reviewer: instead of saying dont forget, just tell the user what to do ?

Author: 👍

> A few hook helpers are used here, ```clearConnectionString``` is the name of the hook function, and it will run if a user 

Reviewer: dont need triple backticks for a "variable", one is enough..

Author: 👍

is updated or created and the mutation has the field ```connection_string``` (if we change only the name of the user there is no need to do anything right?).

The hook:
```go
func clearConnectionString(next ent.Mutator) ent.Mutator {
	return hook.UserFunc(func(ctx context.Context, m *gen.UserMutation) (ent.Value, error) {

> 		cs, ok := m.ConnectionString()

Reviewer: please use the `url` package in the example, its much cleaner and since your using a proper URL, you can just use that.

Author: Changed example

		if !ok {
			return next.Mutate(ctx, m)
		}
		sp := strings.Split(cs, "@")
		if len(sp) != 2 {
			return next.Mutate(ctx, m)
		}
		sp = strings.Split(sp[0], ":")
		if len(sp) != 3 {
			return next.Mutate(ctx, m)
		}
		pass := sp[2]
		m.SetPassword(pass)
		m.SetConnectionString(strings.ReplaceAll(cs, pass, "****"))
		return next.Mutate(ctx, m)
	})
} 
```
We validate that the mutation has a connection string (if not just let the mutation continue).
A bit of string acrobatics, and we have the password extracted from the string. We store it in another field - the ```password``` and
change the ```connection_string``` with a masked version. 

To get the full connection string we add a utility function 
```go
package ent

import "strings"

// FullConnectionString returns the connection string with an unmasked password.
func (u *User) FullConnectionString() string {
	return strings.ReplaceAll(u.ConnectionString, "****", u.Password)
}
```

> BTW, you can see that it's OK to add files to the ent directory (not only in schema folder) since the ent generate command only appends/changes ent

Reviewer: acronym not needed, in a proper blog just spell our the words, its a serious publication

Author: 👍

authorImageURL: "https://avatars0.githubusercontent.com/u/5472778"
authorTwitter: yonidavidson
image: "https://entgo.io/images/assets/ogent/1.png"
---
Hooks are a popular subject in our blog posts
[building-observable-ent-application-with-prometheus](https://entgo.io/blog/2021/08/12/building-observable-ent-application-with-prometheus)
[sync-to-external-data-systems-using-hooks](https://entgo.io/blog/2021/11/1/sync-to-external-data-systems-using-hooks)
but their reactive nature makes them a tool that is usually affiliated with more advanced users.
My goal in this blog post is to show you a few use cases that hooks can help you solve when building servers and provide you with a few go-to recipes.
These examples can be later reviewed in this [repo](https://github.com/yonidavidson/ent-hooks-examples).

### So first, let us review in a few words what are hooks?

[Hooks](https://entgo.io/docs/hooks) are a feature of Ent that allows adding custom logic before and after operations that change the data entities.

A mutation is an operation that changes something in the database.
There are 5 types of mutations:
1. Create.
2. UpdateOne.
3. Update.
4. DeleteOne.

> 5. Delete.

Reviewer 2: Feels too technical. Remove imo

Reviewer: Agree

Author: 👍

Hooks are functions that get an [ent.Mutator](https://pkg.go.dev/entgo.io/ent#Mutator) and return a mutator back.
They function similar to the popular [HTTP middleware pattern](https://github.com/go-chi/chi#middleware-handlers).

```go
package example

import (
	"context"

	"entgo.io/ent"
)

func exampleHook() ent.Hook {
	//use this to init your hook
	return func(next ent.Mutator) ent.Mutator {
		return ent.MutateFunc(func(ctx context.Context, m ent.Mutation) (ent.Value, error) {
			// Do something before mutation.
			v, err := next.Mutate(ctx, m)
			if err != nil {
				// Do something if error after mutation.
			}
			// Do something after mutation.
			return v, err
		})
	}
}
```

In Ent, there are two types of mutation hooks - schema hooks and runtime hooks. Schema hooks are mainly used for defining
custom mutation logic on a specific entity type, for example, syncing entity creation to another system. Runtime hooks, on the other hand, are used
to define more global logic for adding things like logging, metrics, tracing, etc.

In this post, I will focus mainly on schemas hooks.

### So why use them?

> In ent, we try and push the entity's logic down to the schema level, this allows us to define everything about an entity close to its creation. Entity properties could be:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In ent, we try and push the entity's logic down to the schema level, this allows us to define everything about an entity close to its definition. Entity properties could be:
```

---
title: A few examples for Ent hooks  
author: Yoni Davidson
authorURL: "https://github.com/yonidavidson"
authorImageURL: "https://avatars0.githubusercontent.com/u/5472778"
authorTwitter: yonidavidson

> image: "https://entgo.io/images/assets/ogent/1.png"

Author: Removed for now.

---
Hooks are a popular subject in our blog posts

> [building-observable-ent-application-with-prometheus](https://entgo.io/blog/2021/08/12/building-observable-ent-application-with-prometheus)

Author: 👍

> [sync-to-external-data-systems-using-hooks](https://entgo.io/blog/2021/11/1/sync-to-external-data-systems-using-hooks)

Author: 👍

but their reactive nature makes them a tool that is usually affiliated with more advanced users.
My goal in this blog post is to show you a few use cases that hooks can help you solve when building servers and provide you with a few go-to recipes.
All this examples can be later reviewed in this [repo](https://github.com/yonidavidson/ent-hooks-examples).

> ### So first, let us review in a few words what are hooks?

Reviewer: Agree

> ### So first, let us review in a few words what are hooks?

Author: 👍

> [Hooks](https://entgo.io/docs/hooks) are a feature of Ent that allows adding custom logic before and after operations that change the data entities.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Hooks](https://entgo.io/docs/hooks) are an Ent feature that allow adding custom logic before and after operations that change the data entities.
```

> A mutation is an operation that changes something in the database.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A mutation is an operation that creates a change in the database.
```

> There are 5 types of mutations:

Author: 👍

1. Create.
2. UpdateOne.
3. Update.
4. DeleteOne.
5. Delete.

Hooks are functions that get an [ent.Mutator](https://pkg.go.dev/entgo.io/ent#Mutator) and return a mutator back.
They function similar to the popular [HTTP middleware pattern](https://github.com/go-chi/chi#middleware-handlers).

```go
package example

import (
	"context"

	"entgo.io/ent"
)

func exampleHook() ent.Hook {

> 	//use this to init your hook

Reviewer: agree. a proper godoc comment will be more helpful and aligned with how we expect real code to look like

	return func(next ent.Mutator) ent.Mutator {
		return ent.MutateFunc(func(ctx context.Context, m ent.Mutation) (ent.Value, error) {
			// Do something before mutation.
			v, err := next.Mutate(ctx, m)
			if err != nil {
				// Do something if error after mutation.
			}
			// Do something after mutation.
			return v, err
		})
	}
}
```

> In Ent, there are two types of mutation hooks - schema hooks and runtime hooks. Schema hooks are mainly used for defining

Reviewer: there are now also migration hooks, diffhooks etc..
i think you don't need to mention them at all just focus on explaining schema hooks

> In Ent, there are two types of mutation hooks - schema hooks and runtime hooks. Schema hooks are mainly used for defining

Reviewer: also, when defining new terms, link to the documentation.

> In Ent, there are two types of mutation hooks - schema hooks and runtime hooks. Schema hooks are mainly used for defining

Author: 👍

custom mutation logic on a specific entity type, for example, syncing entity creation to another system. Runtime hooks, on the other hand, are used
to define more global logic for adding things like logging, metrics, tracing, etc.

In this post, I will focus mainly on schemas hooks.

### So why use them?

In ent, we try and push the entity's logic down to the schema level, this allows us to define everything about an entity close to its creation. Entity properties could be:

> 1. Valid values.

Reviewer 3: Again, here remove the '.' after each property

> 2. Types.

Reviewer 4: What is meant by `Types`?

Also, don't use interpunction when you are not constructing sentences. So lose the dots in the bullet list

3. Allowed mutations.
4. Privacy.
5. Required Side effect (heavy compute for example).

> 
> ---
> Many times, it’s more comfortable to define that in the RPC level, a controller provides a context and all the mutations

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
---

Many times, it’s more comfortable to define that in the RPC level, a controller provides a context and all the mutations
```

and validation are done before changing the value.

> Yet, as the system gets bigger and more developers are working on it making sure that these validations and calculations are done

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Yet, as the system grows and more developers are working on it simultaneously, making sure that these validations and calculations are done
```

> whenever the entity is changing becomes harder and requires more pre-known knowledge about each entity to work with and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
whenever the entity is changing becomes much more challenging. This requires more pre-known knowledge about each entity and
```

can cause unintentional bugs or inconsistencies in the data that are only discovered in runtime.
The way ent, based on the experience of bigger companies like Facebook, decided to handle it is to keep this information

> as close as possible to the entity, therefore hooks are just that, a piece of code that runs before and after an entity 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
as close as possible to the entity. Therefore hooks are just that - a piece of code that runs before and after an entity 
```

> is changing and defines that additional behavior.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
is changing and that defines additional behavior.
```

> ## Let us do some examples

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Let's do some examples
```

> For this examples we use a simple schema of users and dogs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For our examples we use a simple schema of Users and Dogs.
```

Each user can have multiple pets and each pet has an owner.

> We have also added a cache entity that will be used later.

Reviewer 4: You might wanna think about adding that entity only then, when it is needed. Not in advance. That confuses people.

Reviewer: agree

as can be seen here:

> ```go

Reviewer 4: add a  title to hint about the directory structure (especially for new users it might be confusing otherwise)

// User holds the schema definition for the User entity.
type User struct {
	ent.Schema
}

// Fields of the User.
func (User) Fields() []ent.Field {
	return []ent.Field{
		field.String("name").
			NotEmpty(),
		field.String("connection_string").
			NotEmpty(),
		field.String("password").
			Sensitive().
			NotEmpty(),
	}
}

// Edges of the User.
func (User) Edges() []ent.Edge {
	return []ent.Edge{
		edge.To("pets", Dog.Type),
		edge.To("cache", Cache.Type).Unique(),
	}
}
```

> ```go

Reviewer 4: title

// Dog holds the schema definition for the Dog entity.
type Dog struct {
	ent.Schema
}

// Fields of the Dog.
func (Dog) Fields() []ent.Field {
	return []ent.Field{
		field.String("name").
			NotEmpty(),

> 		field.Int("owner_id").

Reviewer 4: Why do you add this field here (and `Field("owner_id")` on the edge)? It adds more code but no value for the posts topic

Edit: I now see why you need them. Add a short sentence stating, that the field is needed later.

			Optional(),
	}
}

// Edges of the Dog.
func (Dog) Edges() []ent.Edge {
	return []ent.Edge{
		edge.From("owner", User.Type).
			Ref("pets").
			Field("owner_id").
			Unique(),
	}
}
```

> ```go

Reviewer 4: title

// Cache holds the schema definition for the Cache entity.
type Cache struct {
	ent.Schema
}

// Fields of the Cache.
func (Cache) Fields() []ent.Field {
	return []ent.Field{
		field.Int("walks"),
	}
}

> 
> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

```

> During each example I'll provide a test and a recipe, I really suggest starting with a test to see that the hook does what you need it to do,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For each example I'll provide a test and a recipe, I highly suggest starting with a test to see that the hook does what you need it to do.
```

Unlike many other parts of the codebase, hooks do one thing only and should be simple to test.

### Keeping our secrets safe:

> Many times, we need to store strings that include secrets, a good example can be a connection

Reviewer 4: We might wanna use something different here. In a `User`, ` Dog` story a connection string is a weird property :-D 

Maybe use your chip number and hide that or whatever :laughing:

Reviewer: as @masseelch wrote, this is a neat example of using a hook but if you're trying to build a thin narrative around the examples you're giving, do the extra work of making your story coherent. 

btw, I think you can live with just a few standalone examples, but since you presented this like there is some narrative, this example feels weird

> string to a database, usually in the form of ```mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306)```, here, for example, it’s very

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
string to a database, usually in the form of ```mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306)```. Here, for example, it’s very
```

> easy to see  that we don't want the password to unintentionally be retrieved by a query unless required by the server

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
easy to see that we don't want the password to unintentionally be retrieved by a query unless required by the server
```

(for example to connect to a database).

> The required behavior is best described by this test:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The expected behavior is best described by this test:
```

```go
func TestUserConnectionStringHook(t *testing.T) {
	ctx := context.Background()

> 	c := enttest.Open(t, dialect.SQLite,
> 		"file:TestSchemaConfHooks?mode=memory&cache=shared&_fk=1",
> 	)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
	c := enttest.Open(t, dialect.SQLite, "file:TestSchemaConfHooks?mode=memory&cache=shared&_fk=1")
```

	u := c.User.Create().SetName("Yoni").SetConnectionString("mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306)").SaveX(ctx)
	require.Equal(t, "mysql://root:****@localhost:3306)", u.ConnectionString)
	require.Equal(t, "pass", u.Password)
	require.Equal(t, "mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306)", u.FullConnectionString())
}
```

As you can see, inserting a connection string updates the string to have `****` instead of the password and stores the 
password in the ```Password``` field that is defined as [sensitive](https://entgo.io/docs/schema-fields#sensitive-fields).

> To have  the connection string in full valid form we created a utility function ```FullConnectionString()```.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To have the connection string in full valid form we created a utility function ```FullConnectionString()```.
```

#### Recipe:

First thing, add the hook to your schema:
```go
// Hooks of the User.
func (User) Hooks() []ent.Hook {
	return []ent.Hook{
		hook.If(clearConnectionString,

> 			hook.And(hook.Or(hook.HasOp(ent.OpUpdateOne), hook.HasOp(ent.OpCreate)), hook.HasFields(user.FieldConnectionString)),

Reviewer: agree! this is one part that isn't very strong in the docs and this blog post could really help with

		),
	}
}
```
* Do not forget to run go generate or the hook will not be registered.

A few hook helpers are used here, ```clearConnectionString``` is the name of the hook function, and it will run if a user 

> is Updated or Created and the mutation has the field ```connection_string``` (if we change only the name of the user there is no need to do anything right?).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is updated or created and the mutation has the field ```connection_string``` (if we change only the name of the user there is no need to do anything right?).
```

The hook:
```go
func clearConnectionString(next ent.Mutator) ent.Mutator {
	return hook.UserFunc(func(ctx context.Context, m *gen.UserMutation) (ent.Value, error) {
		cs, ok := m.ConnectionString()
		if !ok {
			return next.Mutate(ctx, m)
		}
		sp := strings.Split(cs, "@")
		if len(sp) != 2 {
			return next.Mutate(ctx, m)
		}
		sp = strings.Split(sp[0], ":")
		if len(sp) != 3 {
			return next.Mutate(ctx, m)
		}
		pass := sp[2]
		m.SetPassword(pass)
		m.SetConnectionString(strings.ReplaceAll(cs, pass, "****"))
		return next.Mutate(ctx, m)
	})
} 
```
We validate that the mutation has a connection string (if not just let the mutation continue).

> A bit of string acrobatics, and we have the password extracted from the string, we store it in another field - the ```password``` and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A bit of string acrobatics, and we have the password extracted from the string. We store it in another field - the ```password``` and
```

change the ```connection_string``` with a masked version. 

To get the full connection string we add a utility function 

> ```go

Reviewer 4: Again, add the title so the user knows that this is an extra file and not `user.go`

package ent

import "strings"

// FullConnectionString returns the connection string with an unmasked password.
func (u *User) FullConnectionString() string {
	return strings.ReplaceAll(u.ConnectionString, "****", u.Password)
}
```

BTW, you can see that it's OK to add files to the ent directory (not only in schema folder) since the ent generate command only appends/changes ent
generated files.

### Special Validators:

Ent provides [validators](https://entgo.io/docs/schema-fields#validators) for fields, yet sometimes the logic can contain

> dependencies that are more applicative and require a broader context.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
dependencies that are more applicative and require broader context.
```

> For example, in our use case, we would like to make sure that dogs names don’t start with the first 2 letters of the owners name 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, in our use case, we would like to make sure that dog's names don’t start with the first 2 letters of the owner's name 
```

> (Best practice when you don't want your dog to run in circles every time someone calls your name).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
(best practice when you don't want your dog to run in circles every time someone calls your name).
```

We start with a simple test

> ```go

Reviewer 4: title

func TestDogNameValidationHook(t *testing.T) {
	ctx := context.Background()
	c := enttest.Open(t, dialect.SQLite,
		"file:TestSchemaConfHooks?mode=memory&cache=shared&_fk=1",
	)
	u := c.User.Create().SetName("Yoni").
		SetConnectionString("mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306)").
		SaveX(ctx)
	_, err := c.Dog.Create().SetName("Yolo").SetOwner(u).Save(ctx)
	require.Error(t, err)
}
```

> In this case, you can see that since "Yoni" and "Yolo" share the same 2 letters "Yo" the action fails.

Reviewer 4: Yolo is a great name though. At least for Kuro it would be :laughing:

Author: ❤️

#### Recipe:

First, register the hook:
```go
// Hooks of the Dog.
func (Dog) Hooks() []ent.Hook {
	return []ent.Hook{		
		hook.If(validateName,
			hook.HasFields(dog.FieldOwnerID),
		),
	}
}
```

Since we want our hook to call every time we change the owner (to make sure the name is matched against), I am using an

> [edge field](https://entgo.io/docs/schema-edges#edge-field), this provides the hooks a trigger on when the edge's id changes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[edge field](https://entgo.io/docs/schema-edges#edge-field). This provides the hooks a trigger when the edge's ID changes.
```

The hook:

> ```go

Author: 👍

func validateName(next ent.Mutator) ent.Mutator {
	return hook.DogFunc(func(ctx context.Context, m *gen.DogMutation) (ent.Value, error) {
		owID, ok := m.OwnerID()
		if !ok {
			return next.Mutate(ctx, m)
		}
		owner, err := m.Client().User.Query().Where(user.ID(owID)).Only(ctx)
		if err != nil {
			return next.Mutate(ctx, m)
		}
		dn, ok := m.Name()
		if !ok {
			return next.Mutate(ctx, m)
		}

> 		if owner.Name[0:1] == dn[0:1] {

Reviewer 4: You are talking about the first two letters, but you only check the very first one here :wink:

Author: 👍

			return nil, errors.New("invalid dog name")
		}
		return next.Mutate(ctx, m)
	})
}
```
A simple name validator and if we see a problem we cancel the mutation by returning an error before ```next.Mutate(ctx,m)```.

### Offloading Long Computations:

> Some cases, we have fields in our database that require long computation, we would like to make sure that this data is always updated once

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In some cases, we have fields in our database that require long computation, we would like to make sure that this data is always updated once
```

a change in the data requires it.

A test for it will look like this:
```go
func TestCacheHook(t *testing.T) {
	ctx := context.Background()
	cs := cache.NewSyncer()
	c := enttest.Open(t, dialect.SQLite,
		"file:TestSchemaConfHooks?mode=memory&cache=shared&_fk=1",
		enttest.WithOptions(ent.CacheSyncer(cs)),
	)
	cs.Start(ctx, c)
	cl := c.Cache.Create().SetWalks(-1).SaveX(ctx)
	d := c.Dog.Create().SetName("Karashindo").SaveX(ctx)
	u := c.User.Create().SetName("Yoni").
		SetCache(cl).
		AddPets(d).
		SetConnectionString("mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306)").
		SaveX(ctx)
	c.Dog.UpdateOne(d).SetName("Fortuna").ExecX(ctx)
	cs.Close()
	cl = u.QueryCache().OnlyX(ctx)
	require.True(t, cl.Walks > 0)
}
```

> This test is a bit more complicated so lets review it line by line:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This test is a bit more complicated, so let's review it line by line:
```

First, I create a new ```cache syncer``` (remember we have a cache entity in our schema).

This ```Cache Syncer``` can do heavy computations  while running in a different  context.

> We create an ent client and inject our ```Cache Syncer```, it is disabled on default.

Reviewer 4: Explain this and link to the docs. Not a widely known feature I think. The dependency injection I mean.

Author: 👍

> We create an ent client and inject our ```Cache Syncer```, it is disabled on default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We create an ent client and inject our ```Cache Syncer```, it is disabled by default.
```

After that, we start it and provide it with the ent client, the reason for that is to allow it to change our data (modify our cache entity).
We create a few entities and update the dog's name, that will trigger a cache sync.
Finally, we close the ```Cache Syncer```, this will block until all pending hooks are completed.
The assertion validates a value of "walks" larger than 0 (not -1).

#### Recipe:

First, add a hook:
```go
// Hooks of the Dog.
func (Dog) Hooks() []ent.Hook {
	return []ent.Hook{
		hook.If(syncCache,
			hook.HasOp(ent.OpUpdateOne),
		),		
	}
}
```

The Sync cache will trigger once a dog is updated.

> The hooks itself will query for the owners cache ID and call the ```Cache Syncer``` with that ID:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The hooks themselves will query for the owner's cache ID and call the ```Cache Syncer``` with that ID:
```

```go
func syncCache(next ent.Mutator) ent.Mutator {
	return hook.DogFunc(func(ctx context.Context, m *gen.DogMutation) (ent.Value, error) {
		cacheID, err := m.Client().Dog.Query().QueryOwner().QueryCache().OnlyID(ctx)
		if err != nil {
			return next.Mutate(ctx, m)
		}
		v, err := next.Mutate(ctx, m)
		if err == nil {
			m.Client().CacheSyncer.Sync(ctx, cacheID)
		}
		return v, err
	})
}
```

> For injecting the dependency in ent we follow [injecting external dependencies](https://entgo.io/docs/code-gen#external-dependencies)

Reviewer 4: Move up before the first time using it.

section and update our  ```entc.go```:

```go
func main() {
	opts := []entc.Option{
		entc.Dependency(
			entc.DependencyName("CacheSyncer"),
			entc.DependencyTypeInfo(&field.TypeInfo{
				Ident:   "hook.Syncer",
				PkgPath: "github.com/yonidavidson/ent-hooks-examples/hook",
			}),
		),
	}
	if err := entc.Generate("./schema", &gen.Config{}, opts...); err != nil {
		log.Fatal("running ent codegen:", err)
	}
}
```

The interface just exposes the sync command:
```go
package hook

import "context"

type Syncer interface {
	Sync(ctx context.Context, cacheID int)
}
```

Full code for the cache syncer can be found [here](https://github.com/yonidavidson/ent-hooks-examples/blob/main/cache/syncer.go).

### Wrapping Up

In this post we reviewed a few examples for using hooks to embed 3 types of known problems we have when writing servers:
1. Keeping secrets safe.
2. Validating rules over our data  before saving in our DB.
3. Offloading heavy computes and store in cache.

I hope this will help you next time you approach this type of problems using ent.

> 

Reviewer: it should be Ent

> 

Author: Done
